the observations are of a kind that they should not be understood intellectually but through meditation/direct observation since it's the faster way, meaning intellectual is possible but often leaves up too much room for interpretation. the observations serve as potential confirmations of the reader's observations

---

concentration is the result of solving problems and being able to focus more energy on fewer problems, a virtuous circle, peaking in happiness when maxed

vice versa, loss of concentration is the result of increase of problems, a vicious circle once a threshold of virtuous to vicious is crossed, peaking in panic when maxed

happiness is proportional to the ability to predict the next moment, up to a certain cap

after the cap, happiness transitions first to a flow state (psychic ability, iddhi), and then to transcendence, eventually the complete fading of patterns where death is transcended. extremely uncommon occurence in human life thus mostly not relatable

iddhis are either 1. the capability of being in control of the entire environment or 2. the illusion to be in control or 3. both/neither as in the perfect adaptation of identified pattern to environment

vicious circle has eventual tendency to be perceived as curse and it may 1. be a curse or 2. be mere lack of concentration

virtuous circle has similar tendency to be perceived as blessing

-

fasting leads to increase in concentration, similarly too much food leads to confusion. explained by increase of entropy of observed patterns when digesting/integrating

intentions inherently lead to confusion but suppression of intentions/actions also leads to confusion

intentions are driven either by craving or fear but suppressing the craving equally leads to confusion

while awake, absence of intention is proportional to intensity of observation

vice versa, observing leads to decrease of intentions

confusion as universal marker of wrong decisions

observation as only way to meditate, everything else trickery

-

personality as interplay of experience (truthful, natural, can't get rid off) and role (untruthful, artificial, replaceable)

ease of life being correlated with increase in roleplaying patterns, hardship correlated with increase in experiential patterns

roleplaying focused on short term solutions (getting a job, date) / getting others to do things for oneself

experience naturally creating focus on long term solutions (dealing with sorrow, lack of understanding) / independence from others

-

chronic illness as manifestation of bad habits (psychological patterns and their results)

degree of illness being determined by pace at which illness changes/transforms in nature versus pace at which one adapts to those patterns. when adapting faster than it changes, the illness starts being contained or at least being dealt with

-

long term observation: degree of interest in existential permanent truths (mechanics, patterns) forms boundaries of understanding. cultivation of correct views rearranges all other sub-patterns (everything else, because everything follows fundamental truths) to align correctly, increasing intelligence. tl;dr intelligence is born out of intention to seek lasting truths

suchness as most fundamental existential truth, goal being the alignment with it

resistance to suchness as definition of suffering

alignment (non-resistance) as definition of enlightenment

alignment has to be learned, confusion inherent in all observable beings. enlightenment as step wise process towards alignment with truth

denial, cognitive dissonance, desire (tunnel vision for desired things) as most harmful pre-programmed catalysts of suffering

sheer realization of truth increases alignment but depends on memory, memory as limitation

intuitive tendency that biological limitations are not ultimate, but speculation. under this condition memory would not be existential since coupled to brain (impermanent). tendency that non-existential things are usually irrelevant, but speculation in case of memory. memory as existential snapshot of order in larger chaos; but order most likely being superficial, thus illusion

-

once something is absolutely realized as impermanent it can't be wanted anymore, no matter how fundamental it is. when it's realized, it's seen that it's just a phenomenon and not part of the impermanent part of existence. the permanent watching process shifts onto other things. the effect is twofold because 1. the thing is understood as worthless and 2. the shifting automatically creates more interest in other things, so much so that the momentum is enough to leave the thing behind entirely

the realization slows down the observing process because generally impermanent things have a fast pace of change, require a lot of attention

tendency that the shifting ultimately leads to a state in which no energy is lost, because in absence of things to desire, nothing is missing

energy defined as fundamental sensation that exists at every point in time as range of positive to negative, but also weak to strong, continuous scale, gradual transition

-

numbers are quantification of logic

this is simply understood when looking at on/off boolean states/relationships and scaling up the options, e.g. from asleep/awake to asleep/sleepy/awake to deep sleep/rem/sleepy/well rested/concentrated and so on

the precision of the number defines the subtlety of the logical relationship richness, e.g. high precision in neural network weights allows for more precise mapping

the universe allows for spatial precision down to planck length, which allows for extremely rich level of detail of logical relationships

neural networks, neither biological nor artificial are anywhere near that precision. LLMs will keep becoming smarter with the same dumb data, evolution will produce larger brains for the same dumb environment

-

desire causes tunnel vision. this loss of focus leads to loss of flow, then confusion, finally failure to achieve any higher state of mind

key to right awareness/concentration/mindfulness is to not get caught in any tunnel vision, not follow any patterns, but instead observe them

ultimately any sense-related goal/pursuit creates focus and thus tunnel vision and must be abandoned. in strong contrast to not sense-related longings. mind cannot un-focus, thought should not disperse. resisting this natural way of working is harmful. mind must be occupied. the solution lies in how, not if

-

the root of the sensation of magic lies in not-knowing but searching for the truth

examples are role playing games from the 90s where the internet didn't exist as a pool of information to find the content without discovering it by yourself; and 2. dreams, since they can't be shared and only fully remembered once one enters the dream state of mind with higher subtlety

in this state of dreaming the object is not considered a problem to solve, thus reasoning and abstract thinking does not take place

without abstraction one stays centered and does not zoom out of detail. with full detail one is closer to the actual, real truth to the object, zooming out blurs it and only puts in relation to other objects

ultimately all objects are same in nature, existential matter so to speak; once one is understood, all are understood

abstraction and thinking are the belief that through loss of subtlety one gets closer to total truth, while total truth needs no total subtlety. while one gets closer to a macro picture of existence through thinking, one never gets closer to total understanding/enlightenment because it only exists in sensation. what makes reality real is sensation. not the wavelength of blue or its descriptions are real, but the sensation of the color blue, the rest is thought and in the same realm as confusion. confusion never leaves the thought realm. the root of suffering is not in the sensational, but starts with abstraction because abstraction reduces totality




